 Each word at the leaf of the tree is associated with some fragment of meaning representation in the logic that we care about . When you do a syntactic composition by applying a rule in your context-free grammar, you also do function application  There are no direct objects, and I recall that what we said was that with intransitive verbs, we with verbs in general. one standard way to express, that is to say that there is a event variable. There's some  There always needs to be event management where you just put it, there always needs a new event variable every time you introduce a new events ever . And then and then this rules E part. it's a predicate, but it's here  The way you derive this particular form is just. You have to work through it and figure out that this is the form you need in order for everything to work out and be filled in the place . But conceptually, it's the  The order of the Lambdas here that tells you when you do function application what gets plugged in to which variable there does matter, and that you cannot exchange . And no, you do not have to memorize this very midterm.  There's a whole series of reasoning steps you can derive to show that this is the way that you need to make to make all the representations look more similar to each other in form and to have function application workout across multiple syntactic construct  Language is full of quantifiers, and the ones that most clearly map onto logical quantifiers are these words all and every which map to universal quantifiers . If there were 2 verbs in the sentence, do we expect there to be 2  If you have for all X student X and X likes com, 5, 50, what would that mean? Cause if it's a conjunct. What it means is that it's asserting that everything is a student, and everything likes  The basic idea here is that for universal, it's usually a condition . It's a universal only for . according to some condition which here is all the students, that's the condition for existential . You need both to apply . The  When you say the student, as in the student took comp. , you're asserting that there is an entity who is the student . And you're also asserting that the student participates in some predicate . This is according to Bertone Russell  There's an entity that's a student. There's at most one thing that is a student, and the student participates in this predicate . The way that you do this is with this relatively complex formula in 1st order, logic .  If you ask them to reason about things, they don't think about things logically . They it's all through word co-occurrences . And it is defined with respect to the 1st rule, because, there's at most  Q of x. this is the this is what we want, because it's plugging things, plugging the student predicate in into the correct location . And then there's going to be a Q of X that is still to come  Pnq, the A is the existential existential existential. A becomes P. a becomes P . a becomes Q. a . According to this type of analysis there exists something, and when, whenever you have, there exists, there  Go ahead just to say that there exists something that can be smart. land why is it not absolutely yep. say, a lambda X student of X to P, then it gets plugged in there. Then, if we simplify that  A fake student is not just anything that is not a student . It's that they're faking with respect to the specific property of studenthood studentness . You have to rethink this whole enterprise. you to model the meaning of something  There are lots of phenomena that if you think about it a little bit more, you realize that they're really complex . We just can process language, because we've learned it somehow, but we just process language . I want to talk  With the rules we described, you will get only the 1st reading, and you would not get the second reading . We need a representation that is under specified with respect to some properties that we cannot no, until we have more contacts  When we said the aim was to have this underspecified representation that embodies all readings without explicitly enumerating them, it meant , we will have 1st order logic for every possibility . But we won't capture every possible explicit sentence .  The under specified representation for every student took a course with these rules, and with the this rule for the transitive verb, we'll end there, and I'll see you at the midterm or in office hours. I'll post this