 The reading assignments are not meant to take a long time there, but they are there, those to help complement the material that we discuss in the course . The final project description hopefully by the end of the week. Please watch out for  We're going to look at syntax and a formal system for describing structure called context-free grammars . In this lecture, we'll look at how language is not just a linear sequence of tokens . Text is just an approximation of  If you're from the Uk. you don't pronounce r's at the end of syllables . Instead of saying car, you might say car or there, you would say that. If it's masculine, singular that doesn't start  In the linguistic sense, we're going to talk about how structures in a sentence can be formed and assembled to create larger units, larger structures . And you can combine those structures with other bigger structures to form ever bigger structures until you get  This idea of syntax and that languages have structure is not a new idea. It's not even an idea from last millennium. This is an idea of multiple millennia . Some of the earliest people to have thought about this that we are still  All varieties of language have some grammar . It's quite possible that the informal or casual version of a language has a different grammar compared to the formal version, the written version and the prestigious version . The informal version is not necessarily simpler or  There are many different kinds of constituents that share some similar distributional properties that we can test for . And I'll go through a bunch of tests to check whether something a group of words is a constituent or not . The more tests that  There's not really a universal list of syntactic categories, because as you might expect, linguists don't agree, and there are different formalisms . Different languages might have different syntac categories that seem to make sense for them .  When you define a constituent noun phrases, is there a definition, or is it defined by its tests? When you defines a constituent such as a noun phrase? Is there a . definition of a constituent? Is it defined through the tests  Subject is the most common one, the most at least in English . Adjectives, adjectives, can also require certain arguments, and you can talk about the relations between a determiner the versus its noun, the ball or something  In English, there's this passive structure which changes a transitive verb into one where it only requires the subject, and it changes the mapping between the syntactic and the semantic roles of the arguments of that . Other languages have different role  You can have something a prize which takes a subject, an object, and also a prepositional object . There are many other subcategorization possibilities with the verb wants . The minister apprised him of the new developments.  Prepositions are words that help indicate relations between things in a sentence, and they appear before a phase . They appear after a noun phrase, and those are called post positions . In English, it's overwhelmingly propositions . The whole thing  A formal grammar is a set of rules and associated things that help you generate a . set of strings that make up a language . In that context language simply refers to the set of . strings that you want to accept . You can be  Free grammars can be used for tasks such as stemming and lemmatization and morphological analysis stuff that we talked about at the beginning of the course . However, it turns out for the syntax of natural languages, where multiple  There are other classes of grammars . There's 1 called context Sensitive grammar . You can be . I'm allowed to rewrite an S. To an Mpp. In the context of something else or Np. Can be  A Cfg is a four-tuple. We love those they have a N. And Sigma and R. And S. Where N is a set of non-terminal symbols. Sigma is a . set of rules also called  The subject is there in this 1st element of the grammar . We need to change what can be a verb phrase because we have 3 options . We can have intransitive option, transitive option or the ditransitive option  This is a tree that describes all of the possible sentences that could be accepted . But it doesn't work with any particular sentence . If you want to work with a particular sentence this, this steals this, then you would have to draw  grammar engineering project becomes an engineering project . Adverbs modify the grammar to account for more and more phenomena, and to fix issues with over and under generation . We need to add adverbs to our grammar, to add the adverbs .  Linguists teach that there are empty elements, but some say there may not be empty elements . The empty elements are to do, parsing properly with empty elements becomes intractable because you have to posit all possible combinations of up to  These are 6 different rules just for the sake of saving space and using the vertical bar, that's all . But literally, it's just a safe space. It's these are, think of these as six different rules . And the  The main problem we have is we can generate the ball. Relax the boy or the boy relax the boy, kick the ball . We can have the ball the boy. and then through the Vp branch you can go to Vp  We need one rule, Mps Vps, and one role, which is MpVP . There are 2 different kinds of noun phrases, the ones that are 3rd person singular . Singular nouns would be balls . And  Every time we create a distinction we have to think about how we incorporate that into the grammar . Usually it means that you have to split up a category into multiple categories . People have come up with schemes to make this a little bit more  In a dependency grammar, you draw arrows directed directed edges to connect and describe this relation . From student you can draw an arrow to V, and from 4 you draw to exam and from exam to B dependency . Grammars are just  People often work with dependency grammars rather than constituent trees . dependency trees can be converted into constituent trees if the dependency edges don't cross each other . and constituent trees can also be also converted into dependency trees . The way to do  You can have dependencies, graphs where the edges cross each other . This is an example from German . He has me tried to reach me, or he has tried mean to reach. It's he has me . tried me, not tried