 David Adelani, an associate professor in the School of computer science, will talk about what this course is about the topics and forth . Professor: By the end of today's lectures, at least, you should be able to know  For the evaluation we have 2 programming assignments, which will be 20% . We're going to have 4 reading assignments, 5% each and then at the in the middle of the semester, we are going . to have a midterm which  It should be at least a project that could extend an existing model to solve a particular task and work on a relevant topic of interest . If you are late to submit your assignment, you have a grace period of 24 h. If it  We want to make a distinction between computational linguistics and natural language processing . We all know about Llms Chat gpt, and on. And they have impressive performance. But answering is a very, very difficult task. that many labs  Language model is a simple concept that has been a statistical Nlp for many, many years . Key insight is that you learn correlations between words given, a context predicts the one . Commercial use cases from customer service, personal assistant and healthcare  This is not about large language models. How did we get to land? Longer models dominating the end of your research. What was the progress of the field of Nlp. How do we evaluate and analyze Nlp systems? How  Language has a lot of importance both for a daily task and in different industries . The largest proportion of the languages in the world are in Asia, followed by Africa, and then the Pacific . I would encourage you to also have projects that  There's a big distinction about whether you're working on Nlu task or Nlg. But nowadays we tend to be the model. That work for both Nlp and Nl. Task . The goal of Cl is language technology  We are trying to understand what is the innate knowledge most children already have in order to learn their mother tongue . In language processing some sentences are supposed to be correct, but are difficult to process . There is a way you can detect this  The course will cover the mathematical foundations of sale, mathematical properties of formal system and algorithm . The question is, can they be efficiently learned from data or efficiently recovered from a sentence? And also we do have some complexity analysis. Why design  Linguists, at least, have traditionally divided up language, the phenomenon of language, into these different subdomains . We have phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pramatics, discourse, discourse .  Phonology is something that's often confused with phonetics, but it's a different area of study that studies the rules regarding how sounds are patterned in a language and how they're organized with each other . Here we have 3  If you speak French, if you're a native French speaker, your B's and your P's are different from the B's in English . This is one of the ways you can tell whether someone grew up speaking a language in that  in English, we have strict rules about the orderings of words, and how you're allowed to put them together to form a sentence . If you say IA woman saw a park Indie, that is not an English sentence, that's  There are at least 2 interpretations of the sentence: Ross wants to marry a Swedish woman . The other interpretation is that Ross really has a thing for Swedish women . The difference is caused by different senses or interpretations of this article of a .  In terms of the literal meaning none of these statements evaluate to false . But it's clear that there is a interpretation that any reasonable speaker of the language would give . If I say cilantro tastes great, then the I there is pointing  In modern NLP, we often think about modern Nlp as some combination of some pre specified knowledge, and also machine learning from data . Not all Nlp methods necessarily have to be machine learning based or machine learning methods, but still  Comp 5, 50 is to help you understand the broad topics and applications and common terminology of the field . The goal of the course is to . help prepare you for either research or employment, including internships in computational linguistics or N  You can feel free to agree or disagree, but at least by the end of the course you'll be able to better argue that for your point of view, yes, AI will take over the world because or no, it's over