 David Ifeoluwa Adelani: North campus. be discussing Engram language model. I will skip the review of last time. And then are we also recording the lecture? Some people are able to join. Some people  We're going to examine more statistical language modeling based on n grams, and then we'll do or maximum likelihood by relative frequency . Then we'll examine how to evaluate our language model . One of the most popular technique is what is called  In Slide 7, we have the Fuzi cases and the question is, how do you separate? Let's assume you want to build a vocabulary. What are you going to do? Would it bematization or stemming? Or  The last few words at Carras. and also you have cases , apart from, what is British, English, or American English. We have different kinds of stem up. We treat this as a stem. and then we also have  You always need a corpus, and of course you could also have several copperam that you will combine to form one gigantic text . For the relative frequency you have to normalize this by the size of your sentence. which is correct from  Mandel Broth's law is a generalization of this law, which is a law that gets every language . It differs for different languages because different languages have different structures. Practical implication of this most war types are very rare.  The world is morphologically rich because of the number of words that appear all at once, and in lips you have 80% of words appear at once . And then for this thing, it's really difficult to . you will just have  Given a context C, the random variable here is W, which can take any word in our dictionary . Given the context merely at a little . you can compute this probability, but sometimes, when we are working on this, we often  A good language model should assign a higher probability to a grammatical string of English . The length, the length of the sentence, and the reality of the words in the sentence affect the probability . The longer model can also predict an incorrect  Language model is a big application of language model and also machine translation . ASR is a solution that maximizes a combination of tax-specific quality . If you just focus on having a very good probability distribution, it may not work on  What's the probability of the world? we make use of this assumption, which is called conditional independence . It's very similar to what I've explained on the Board for unigram probability . The last 2 words of the format are  Can you compute a unigram and background language model, using the following sentence? Can you count the probability of each word based on all the words in the purpose? I just have a question about unicrons. If we count the  You don't need to do it because it works, because you're focusing on just classification . Here, we are focusing on a more general language task . What's the probability of is that you are going to take them 2 by tw  At the end of the sentence, if nothing is happening, this is more a unigram. You can skip the last discarded, because there's nothing . No, it doesn't affect the calculation. It just affects how you group  Cross entropy is the expectation of the expected amount of information we can get while observing a random variable . If you are observing a likely outcome, less information is gained, but if you're observing a more rare information, more information is lost  If there's maximum fairness that means you cannot easily predict what will happen . Then you can have a very high expected value of the information which is the entropy eye entropy . And then, if it's biased, then you can easily determine  We are just saying that this will be 2 ways to power. Some people formulate it differently, which would be if you assume log of E. This can also be the exponential of the cross entropy. You have questions that's the end