Jackie Cheung, Professor: Yes, , I'm recording . you haven't missed out much yet. we're in the setting of syntax-driven semantic composition. And last class, we started talking about the specifics of how this is done. We talked about nouns mostly proper nouns, and we talked about intransitive verbs. With intransitive verbs, we with verbs in general. one standard way to express, that is to say that there is a event variable. This is to build some meaning representation in order to be able to do some inferences. with nouns and noun things, it's more obvious that you're creating these entities, and then you can reason about them and their relations to each other. There always needs to be event management where you just put it. There always needs. to be some event variable every time you introduce a new events ever . And then and then this rules E part. it's a predicate, but it's here is function is to add a proper is to say, what's the property of this event. variable. We're talking about the entity associated with this event variable, . And it's that it's it's of this type. But again, conceptually, it's exactly the same. And the way you derive this particular form is just. You have to work through it and figure out that this is the form you need in order for everything to work out. And and you won't have to do anything this complex on the midterm. The order of the Lambdas here that tells you when you do function application what gets plugged in to which variable there. that does matter, and that you cannot exchange. And for Vp rewrites to Vnp. remember, from the previous slide, you take the verb semantics and the noun semantic noun phrase semantics, and you combine them together. There's a whole series of reasoning steps you can derive to show that this is the way that you need to make to make all the representations look more similar to each other in form. There could have been a simpler form that works with this specific sentence. But if you want the same approach to work across multiple semantic phenomena, then you need it to be a little bit more complicated. Language is full of quantifiers, and the ones that most clearly map onto logical quantifiers are these words all and every which map to universal quantifiers. All students Comp, 5, 50, it's for all. X student X implies something. Student X implies, x. Comp 550, technically here to be consistent. 550 is expressed by an existential quantifier. Such that X is a student, and then X likes comp. However, you want to represent that just as a reminder. the universal quantifier is almost always accompanied by this implication. logical implication, whereas the existential one is accompanied by the conjunction. The basic idea here is that for universal, it's usually a condition. It's a universal only for , according to some condition which here is all the students, that's the condition for existential. You need both to apply. There exists such that P Of x and Q of X, and then you can check that within the derivation in a tree. which is, it's from Russell in 19 0, 5. , it's the Russell's theory of definite descriptions. When you say the student, as in the student took comp. You're really asserting 3 things. First, st you're asserting that there is an entity who is the student. And you're also asserting that the student participates in some predicate. This is according to Bertone Russell. , in this analysis, then in you can express all of this in 1st order logic. There's an entity that's a student. There's at most one thing that is a student, and the student participates in this predicate. And that's how you model the meaning of the student took Comp 550. The question is when we say that there is at least one thing being referred to, are we talking about everywhere in the entire domain? Or are wetalking about within the context of where that sentence is uttered? I would say that they do quite in stringing together sentences that seem to use quantifiers correctly, in a grammatically fluent way. But if you ask them to reason about things, and if you asked them about oh, I said, , there's a student. And the student has these properties and got these grades. They might not reason because they don't connect the information expressed about the student back to when it's introduced. And we are talking about and associating the pieces of information with them. They it's all through word co-occurrences. Q of x. this is the this is what we want, because it's plugging things, plugging the student predicate in into the correct location. And then there's going to be a Q of X that is still to come, which is where we plug in the part about likes. and then you can do this for the rest of the sentence and work through all of those function applications very carefully. P. a becomes P. a. Pnq, the A is the existential. According to this type of analysis there exists something, and when, whenever you have, there exists, it's usually paired with a conjunction. If we want to say that there are smart students, then they are Lambda X, smart X and student X. Go ahead just to say that there exists something that can be smart. Why is it not absolutely yep. say, a student of X to P, then it gets plugged in there. But there are other adjectives fake, or former, or false, or things that. are also dead, that where, , you cannot model them with a conjunction. Its definition relies one student as , exactly. There are 2 senses of fake. You can say someone is very fake in the sense that they're not sincere. But a fake student is also not just anything that is not a student. you need to rethink this whole enterprise. you to model the meaning of something fake student with non subjective adjectives. Linguistics is about language and linguistics. There are lots of phenomena that if you think about it a little bit more, you realize that they're really complex. We just can process language, because we've learned it somehow. I want to talk about another common property of natural language, involving modification that is interesting, and it involves quantifiers. whereas the existential quantifier is in the object position, it's on the inside. And if you, if you dutifully work through all of the syntactic compositions with the semantic attachments. with the rules we described, you will get only the 1st reading, and you would not get the second reading. that's a problem with our current approach. we would to have a way to derive both of these readings from the syntax. When we said the aim was to have this underspecified representation that embodies all readings without explicitly enumerating them, it meant , we will have 1st order logic for every possibility. But we won't capture every possible explicit sentence. This, this is the an example of that. This fits that definition, because I'll show that you can derive both possible meaning representations. And then it becomes for all. Student X implies the events and the and the X gets put into the correct place with the taker. And then you do the same trick where you take entry 2 out of storage, and then you introduce a Lambda abstraction over s. 2 to make it a bound variable. then you can then do the simplification. and you end up with one of the 2 readings. which is the existential outscoping the universal.