David Adelani and Jackie Cheung will teach the course on natural language processing. By the end of today's lectures, at least, you should be able to know what these terms mean, semantics and pragmatics. Do you prefer the captions, or are they distracting? there's a way to keep them, but not show them on screen. for the evaluation we have 2 programming assignments, which will be 20%. We're going to have 4 reading assignments, 5% each. And then we have a group project which could be a group of up to 3. The the Gopaja will be the final exam exactly. It doesn't have to be completely November. , but it should be at least a project that could extend an existing model to solve a particular task and work on a relevant topic of interest. If you are late to submit your assignment, you have a grace period of 24 h, which is very generous. If it's more than 24 h. . we will decide on what to do of plagiarism. We want to make a distinction between computational linguistics and natural language processing. People still do not agree on what is competition, linguist linguistics. We all know about Llms Chat gpt, and on. when I was doing my Phd question, answering is a very, very difficult task. language model is a very, very simple concept that has been a statistical Nlp for many, many years. And the key insight is that you learn correlations between words given, a context predicts the one. For you to predict the word you have to decide using different algorithms to say, what word to predict? Training language model on storybook. you could take the entire text in the on the web. Longer models dominating the end of your research. What was the progress of the field of Nlp. Why did people try methods? How do we evaluate and analyze Nlp systems? Language is not all only working on English language. One of my research area is multilingual nlp. The largest proportion of the languages in the world are in Asia, followed by Africa, and then the Pacific. I would encourage you to also have projects that extends more. There's a big distinction about whether you're working on Nlu task or Nlg. But nowadays we tend to be the model. That work for both Nlp and Nl. Task. The goal of Cl is language technology applications and also scientifically understanding how language works. There are other reasons to study Co and Nlp as . Here we have the nature of language. And all of , chomsky. Propose a universal grammar for language on are here. We are trying to understand what is the innate knowledge. That's what most children already have in order to learn their mother tongue. In this course, we're primarily going to be focusing on text. This is different from the perception, at least by traditionally in linguistics, that the spoken form is the primary form of language. It's it's really simple to have come up with a scheme to store text, and then we can grab all of it from online. Linguists have traditionally divided up language, the phenomenon of language, into these different subdomains. We have phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pramatics, discourse. We've also had tremendous progress in that by using deep learning techniques there sometimes is a perception that is a solved problem. Phonology is something that's often confused with phonetics. It's a different area of study that studies the rules regarding how sounds are patterned in a language and how they're organized with each other. Here we have 3 related, similarly sounding words, peach and speech and beach. All 3 of these sounds are pronounced differently. English has a very simple, relatively simple system of word formation. English morphology is relatively simple compared to many other languages. We won't spend that much more time on morphology in this course. we still have an English bias, but in other languages, Finnish or Czech or Swahili, many other language have very complex morphologies. In English, we have strict rules about the orderings of words, and how you're allowed to put them together to form a sentence. If you say IA woman saw a park Indie, that is not an English sentence, that's not a grammatical sentence of English. Another interesting thing is that these phenomena and language there are aspects of them that cause the same sentence to have multiple interpretations. There are at least 2 interpretations of the sentence. Ross wants to marry a Swedish woman. And then the other interpretation is that Ross really has a thing for Swedish women. And , it's caused by different senses or interpretations of this article of a . Would you any dessert would be delicious? that in terms of the literal meaning none of these statements evaluate to false. But it's clear that there is a interpretation that any reasonable speaker of the language would give. There are other issues in pragmatics which are quite interesting. This one is called Dixis which is that the interpretation of expressions can depend on extra linguistic context. In modern Nlp, there's often we often think about modern NLP as some combination of some pre specified knowledge, and also machine learning from data. Not all Nlp methods necessarily have to be machine learning based or machine learning methods, but still some of the ways in which we investigate these issues. Comp. 5, 50 is designed to help students understand the broad topics and applications of computational linguistics. The goal of the course is to help prepare you for either research or employment, including internships in the field. We're going to learn some basic linguistics along the way, and we're also learning some basic algorithms. At the end, hopefully, you can answer questions , is it easier or hard to do something? And then, some people are , Oh, it's AI gonna take over the world. And that's a controversial topic I might give you one view of it. You can feel free to agree or disagree, but at least by the end of the course you'll be able, you should be able to better argue that for your point of view.